We arrived in Malta and disembarked onto the dark side.
And then we board a number of very old, dilapidated buses with no windows.
And we all look a little bit like coal miners coming off shift, in that we were dirty and disheveled.
And then we were transported to a place called Saffi, Saffi Strip.
Saffi Strip was a length of aircraft runway, large enough to allow Wellington bombers to land.
And it was a base mainly for Wellington bombers and hurricane fighters.
And I think, I'm not sure, I think it was also the base for Fayette Gourpentieratie, the three, I'm not very sure,
the one with the torpedo loaded under the fuselage.
And we had a tremendous respect for the pilots because if they didn't use the torpedo on their sortie
and they came into land with a torpedo under their fuselage, one false move and that would have been curtant.
But anyway, we were greeted by the Air Force Station, Luca.
It was originally called Saffi and the Saffi Strip became the Luca main airport.
We found ourselves surrounded by a large semicircle of field kitchens.
And the CO welcomed us to Malta. He told us that he could feed us, but he couldn't accommodate us.
For the Luftwaffe had damaged the berth and they were unenhabitable, but he hoped to have them repaired very soon.
But for the time being, we had to sleep in the open. There were no washing facilities. We were just being fed.
So we then had to take out our belly cans and take out our irons and we slept in the open for I think it was three nights altogether
before we got back to base at Luca and were able to have the normal washing and toiletry facilities.
The wireless mechanics had built us radio operators, a new VHFDF, a very high frequency direction finding station,
on the edge of the runway and it was disguised in an old farm building.
And there we operated a three-watt system and to get back to base, of course, we always had to cross the runway.
And I can remember one particular time when I was crossing the runway, an Italian marquee fighter decided to do a very rare straff of the runway.
And I was fortunately near to Nally the steamroller. I dived under the front roller of the steamroller and that really did save my life.
And nearby, about a hundred yards or so, was a Wellington bomber which this straff had set on fire.
And luckily for me, I got away with that one. But the story of Nally is that Nally was an old fashioned steamroller with a brick front roller and two rear iron wheels.
The Wellington bombers would be out bombing the North African coast and in the meantime the left would be bombing Saffi.
So before the war engines could land on the return joint in the runway, bomb holes had to be filled up.
Well, it was a case of every hand on deck filling up the bomb holes and Nally the steamroller would iron them out as best it could to enable the aircraft to land.
If we take a look at the situation in the Mediterranean in 1941, you had the British at Gibraltar, but coming eastwards you had Spanish territory which is Agua AXA.
Agua AXA was friendly with the Germans. Then you had Italy with Mussolini and also the Aeronautica and the German Luftwaffe.
And to the south on the North African coast there was a very large slice of it held by Ronald. Ronald depended on his supplies very largely from Italy, mainly by ship.
So in Malta the British had a submarine base at Manuel Island and they also had a squadron of Wellingtons at Lucca.
And they were proven a very nasty thorn in the side of the flesh of the enemy forces. And that is why Malta became the target of such prolonged siege and intense bombing.
During my stay at Lucca we continued with the VHFDF work.
And during my three years in Malta I served at Tocali which was a fighter base, Alfa also a fighter base, and Califrara which was actually a Sunderland flying boat base.
It was much the same work in all those stations for ATR direction finding.
And then for firstly something like six months I spent in Goja, a nearby island, to Malta.
That gave some relief from the constant bombing. We set up a station again in an old farm building in Goja.
And for a short while we lived in a hotel called the Duke of Edinburgh near Vittoriosa in Goja.
Our hotel stay was short lived really. We moved into other accommodation adjoining Vittoriosa.
And unfortunately occasionally the Italians would do a strafe down the main street and the locals tended to blame our presence as a reason for that.
But after a short while we were well received and Goja was quite a respite really.
In the evening for example when the temperature dropped and it was getting dark we used to follow a group of musicians walking around the island playing typical Maltese folk music on that lovely instrument the mandolin.
We used to enjoy that very much. So the stay eventually in Goja they built a radar station on a mountainside.
So we had a small proper RAF unit then and we moved into that.
The radar of course in those days was crude compared with what it is nowadays.
For instance Sicily where the Luftwaffe and the Aeronautica were based was only 60 miles from Malta so by the time the aircraft were airborne even at the speed in those days they were almost over the target anyway.
15 minutes cloud time and they were there. So what radar was was a help but it meant that the scrambling of aircraft from airfields in Malta had to be very very rapid indeed to enable the aircraft to fly.
To gain sufficient height to be in a combative position.
I left Gojo with quite a lot of happy memories really and been there a couple of times on holiday since.
One of them was of course where I learned to play chess.
But from Gojo I got posted to air headquarters in the RAF air headquarters in Valletta.
Valletta of course being the capital of Malta alongside the Grand Harbour and the air headquarters was wholly underground.
Quite large areas and I found myself in the operations room.
This wasn't radio direction finding this really was radio telephone operating again which I found a bit monotonous actually.
But we were billeted in a bombed multi-house I think it was in South Street.
Further up the road was the canteen.
The air headquarters was also an interesting time. Some of the bombing was still continuing.
I wouldn't know that far away when the prize and joy of Malta the opera house in Valletta was hit.
That turned into a bit of a mess of things.
But at air headquarters I joined the RAF headquarters boxing team and I played water polo for the RAF headquarters swimming team.
Malta was reputed to be the most heavily bombed area for its size during the World War II.
But the Italians were very accurate in their bombing and they bombed from high levels.
A lot of the letter got damaged. The main target of course was the Grand Harbour and the dockyard.
That suffered most of the consequences of the bombing.
I love the German bombing was a bit more haphazard. A lot of the German bombs never exploded.
They were all very exploded bombs. One has to pay tribute to the bomb disposal squad of those days.
They were brave men because these bombs weren't going to get lodged in deep soil or farmland.
They were mainly in rocks and buildings and sandstone.
They had some very, very difficult tasks and very hazardous tasks in extracting them.
But they were a very proud, pretty man.
During my stay in Volatone, Maltese people were awarded the George Cross.
When it came out to medals, there was no specific medal for service in Malta.
But we were told that Malta service would be incorporated in the medal of the Africa Star.
So we were entitled to the campaign medal of the Africa Star.
In May 1944, I'd been in Malta for almost three years.
The powers had decided that they were going to send us back to the UK.
We were going home to Blighty, as it was called.
Would we be flown home? Would we go on a troop ship? How would we get home?
The answer soon was evident.
We weren't going to fly home, though, on a troop ship.
After three years in Malta, with all the problems that got involved,
our reward was to be sent home on a damaged tank landing craft at LST F121 called the Boxer.
The Boxer took part in the Allied invasion of Italy, and it had its bottom stored in at Salerno.
It had been repaired to make it sufficiently seaworthy.
It wasn't a particularly big ship. It had a displacement of something like three and a half thousand tons.